# Welcome to Google Summer of Code with JSON Schema!

> :warning: Even thought JSON Schema has not been selected as mentoring organization for 2023, we managed to include 2 of our projects inside [Postman mentoring organization](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/organizations/postman).  

JSON Schema will be applying to 2023's Google Summer of Code Program as a mentoring organization. In case of being accepted, we will receive applications within the timeframe allocated by GSoC. Please, visit the Program timeline [here](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/timeline) for more details.

Table of contents:
1. [About GSoC](#about-gsoc)
2. [About JSON Schema](#about-json-schema)
3. [Our Project Ideas](#our-project-ideas)
4. [Contact](#contact)
5. [How to Apply](#how-to-apply)
6. [Application Template](#application-template)
7. [Guidelines for Contributing](#guidelines-for-contributing)

# About GSoC

Google Summer of Code is a global, online program focused on bringing new contributors into open source software development. GSoC Contributors work with an open source organization on a 12+ week programming project under the guidance of mentors. For more details, visit the official site of [GSoC Program](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023).

# About JSON Schema

[JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/)  is a vocabulary that allows you to annotate and validate JSON documents - 60+ million weekly installs. It defines how a JSON document should be structured, making it easy to ensure that a JSON instance is formatted correctly, and it is useful for automated testing and validating. In addition, JSON Schema provides clear human- and machine-readable documentation. 

JSON Schema is an incubating project of OpenJS Foundation and a welcoming, inclusive, and vibrant [community](https://json-schema.slack.com).

# Our Project ideas

Here is a list of our 2023 project ideas:

- [#311 Bowtie and the World of JSON Schema](#311-bowtie-and-the-world-of-json-schema) 
- [#315 Extension the official test suite of JSON Schema](#315-extension-the-official-test-suite-of-json-schema)
- [#316 OpenAPI pre v3.1 JSON Schema support in Alterschema](#316-openapi-pre-v31-json-schema-support-in-alterschema)
- [#318 Data Transformation Utilities Using JSON Schemas](#318-data-transformation-utilities-using-json-schemas)

---
### [#311](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues/311) Bowtie and the World of JSON Schema 

**Brief Description**
The world of JSON Schema is immense. JSON Schema tooling exists in countless languages across a variety of uses (data validation of course a noteworthy and prominent one). Implementing the JSON Schema specification(s) in a fully compliant way is not without challenge, meaning as a *user* of JSON Schema it is important to understand how a particular implementation may deviate such that one can make constructive tooling choices or help implementations improve. [Bowtie](https://github.com/bowtie-json-schema/bowtie/) is a recently created tool to aide in this task, helping to surface the conformance of various JSON Schema tools with the specification by running them against a set of [known correct test cases](https://github.com/json-schema-org/JSON-Schema-Test-Suite) and [regularly rendering the results to a web page](https://bowtie-json-schema.github.io/bowtie/). But it can do more!

**Expected Outcomes**
* Enhance (or replace) Bowtie's [simplistic current UI](https://bowtie-json-schema.github.io/bowtie/) so that it most easily answers "what do various implementations say about each test case" -- making it snappier and more featureful
* Add support for further JSON Schema implementations by creating [Bowtie harnesses](https://bowtie-json-schema.readthedocs.io/en/latest/implementers/) in additional languages
* Teach Bowtie to compare not only True/False validation results but also the [full JSON Schema standardized output formats](https://json-schema.org/specification.html#output-schemas-and-examples)

**Skills Required**
* HTML/CSS/Javascript familiarity
* Some notion of what JSON Schema is -- or equivalently some experience using a similar data validation tool including writing SQL Schemas for databases
* Basic experience with [any of a broad set of languages with JSON Schema implementations](https://json-schema.org/implementations.html#validators) or curiosity to learn enough about them to write a simple program
* Some Python experience a strong plus

**Mentors**
[Julian Berman](https://github.com/Julian)

**Expected Difficulty**
Easy-Medium

**Expected Time Commitment**
175 Hour

---
### [#315](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues/315) Extension the official test suite of JSON Schema

**Brief Description**
The JSON Schema test suite is a collection of reviewed examples which support creating compliant implementations of the JSON Schema specification(s) by verifying their validation result against the expected ones. The existing test suite, which covers validation results (whether a particular piece of data is valid or invalid under a schema) is mature, containing tests across all modern JSON Schema versions. Most recently, JSON Schema has grown to include the notion of annotations, which are pieces of metadata collected whilst processing an instance using a schema. These annotations are used to define various JSON Schema keywords, but also are useful for building JSON Schema tooling beyond simple valid/invalid validation results.
An initial set of annotation tests has been [added to the suite](https://github.com/json-schema-org/JSON-Schema-Test-Suite/tree/main/output-tests) to begin work on providing tests for this functionality, but it needs extending to fully cover the set of annotation-related functionality in the specification.

**Expected Outcomes**
Outcomes of this work should include:
- Carefully read and understand the JSON Schema specifications with a focus on annotations, combing the spec for test cases which should be added, and raising discussion questions in cases where behavior seems unclear in the specification
- Production of a suite of JSON test cases which fully cover of all JSON Schema keywords which produce annotations, by adding corresponding tests for each one (or each scenario) alongside their expected annotation output for all (3) versions of JSON Schema which contain annotation-related behavior
- Authoring of a simple annotation collection library, either by re-implementing "throwaway" annotation support in an existing implementation which already has it (e.g. https://github.com/gregsdennis/json-everything) or in a net-new implementation. The purpose of doing so should specifically be to ensure that the suite of tests added "fully cover" the relevant functionality (i.e. that they test all scenarios needed for annotation collection)

**Skills Required**
- Some notion of what JSON Schema is -- or equivalently some experience using a similar data validation tool including writing SQL Schemas for databases
- Basic experience with [any of a broad set of languages with JSON Schema implementations](https://json-schema.org/implementations.html#validators) or curiosity to learn enough about them to write a simple program
- Some Python experience a strong plus

**Mentors**
[Julian Berman](https://github.com/Julian)

**Expected Difficulty**
Easy-Medium

**Expected Time Commitment**
175 Hour

---
### [#316](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues/316) OpenAPI pre v3.1 JSON Schema support in [Alterschema](https://github.com/sourcemeta/alterschema)

**Brief Description**
OpenAPI, before a certain version, used a variant of JSON Schema that is not 100% compliant with the specification. Alterschema is an open-source tool to automatically upgrade schemas across versions of the JSON Schema specification. The intention of this idea is to extend Alterschema with support for upgrading old OpenAPI JSON Schema definitions to JSON Schema 2020-12.

**Expected Outcomes**
Add a new set of transformation rules to Alterschema for upgrading old OpenAPI JSON Schema definitions to JSON Schema 2020-12

**Skills Required**
- JSON
- JSON Schema
- OpenAPI

**Mentors**
[Juan Viotti](https://github.com/jviotti)

**Expected Difficulty**
Easy/Medium.

**Expected Time Commitment**
175 hours.

---
### [#318](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues/318) Data Transformation Utilities Using JSON Schemas

**Brief Description**
JSON Schema is designed for validation, but the information in a schema can be used to for a number of other purposes. One of those purposes is data transformation.

**Expected Outcomes**
Provide an implementation of the following utilities in any language. They should work with at least the latest version of JSON Schema. Tests should be described in JSON so others who want to write a similar tool in a different language can easily use your tests to ensure compatibility.

* Provide a utility that takes a JSON Schema and a JSON document and adds to the document any values that are missing but have a `default` specified for that value in the JSON Schema.
* Provide a utility that takes a JSON Schema and a JSON document and removes properties in the JSON document that are not described in the JSON Schema.
* Provide a utility that takes a JSON Schema and a query string from a form post (`application/x-www-form-urlencoded`) and convert the string to JSON using the JSON Schema to know the types for the values.
  * For example, the string `?foo=1` with schema `{ "properties": { "foo": { "type": "number" } } }` should return `{ "foo": 1 }` rather than `{ "foo": "1" }`.

**Skills Required**
* A basic understanding of JSON Schema

**Mentors**
[Jason Desrosiers](https://github.com/jdesrosiers)

**Expected Difficulty**
Easy

**Expected Time Commitment**
175

# Contact

Join the GSoC discussion channel in Slack  [here](https://json-schema.slack.com/archives/C04MVQSRBRS) Introduce yourself and start the discussion!

For personal issues, you can contact JSON Schema team at [benjamin.granados@postman.com](mailto:benjamin.granados@postman.com).

## How to apply

1.  **Choose one** of the [projects available](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Agsoc+sort%3Acreated-desc).
2.  **Talk with the mentor** in Slack about what they expect of GSoC applicants and get help from them to prepare your application. 
3.  **Write your application**. All applications must go through Google's official application form. You can read an application template [here](#application-template).
4.  **Submit your application to Google before the deadline.** We actually recommend you submit a few days early to avoid last minute issues. 

## Application Template

An ideal application will contain the following:
1.  A descriptive Title.
2.  Information about you, including full contact information. Which time zone you're in. Describe your academic studies, any previous work, internships, relevant work experience and list your skills that will help you to achieve the goal.
3.  Link to open source projects you have contributed to. Links to your pull requests or code samples goes here.
4.  Information about your view on the chosen project. 
5.  Information about other commitments that might affect your ability to work during the GSoC period. (e.g. classes, exams, job, holidays etc.) 

## Guidelines for Contributing

Please visit our [Contributing guide](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more details.
