# Welcome to Google Summer of Code with JSON Schema!

JSON Schema will be applying to 2023's Google Summer of Code Program as a mentoring Organizarion. In case of being acepted, we will be receiving applications within the timeframe allocated by GSoC. Please, visit the  the Program timeline [here](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/timeline) for more details.

Table of contents:
1. [About GSoC](#about-gsoc)
2. [About JSON Schema](#about-json-schema)
3. [Our Project Ideas](#our-project-ideas)
4. [Contact](#contact)
5. [How to Apply](#how-to-apply)
6. [Application Template](#application-template)
7. [Guidelines for Contributing](#guidelines-for-contributing)

# About GSoC

Google Summer of Code is a global, online program focused on bringing new contributors into open source software development. GSoC Contributors work with an open source organization on a 12+ week programming project under the guidance of mentors. For more details visit the official site of [GSoC Program](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023) .

# About JSON Schema

[JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/)  is a vocabulary that allows you to annotate and validate JSON documents - 60+ million weekly installs. It defines how a JSON should be structured, making it easy to ensure that a JSON is formatted correctly, and it is useful for automated testing and validating. In addition, JSON Schema provides clear human- and machine-readable documentation. 

JSON Schema is an incubating project of OpenJS Foundation and also a welcoming, inclusive and vibrant [Community](https://json-schema.slack.com).

# Our Project ideas

TL;DR See [here](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Agsoc+sort%3Acreated-desc) our of ideas for this year's edition.  

# Contact

Join the GSoC discussion channel in slack  [here](https://json-schema.slack.com/archives/C04MVQSRBRS) Introduce yourself and start the discussion!

For personal issues, you can contact JSON Schema team at [benjamin.granados@postman.com](mailto:benjamin.granados@postman.com).

## How to apply

1.  **Choose one** of the [projects available](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues?q=is%3Aopen+label%3Agsoc+sort%3Acreated-desc).
2.  **Talk with the mentor** in Slack about what they expect of GSoC applicants and get help from them to prepare your application. 
3.  **Write your application**. All applications must go through the official Google's application form. You can read an application template [here](#application-template).
4.  **Submit your application to Google before the deadline.** We actually recommend you submit a few days early to avoid last minute issues. 

## Application Template

An ideal application will contain:
1.  A descriptive Title.
2.  Information about you, including full contact information. Which time zone you're in. If you're studying, your institution, course, and year.
3.  Link to open source projects you have contributed to.
4.  Information about your view on the choosen project. 
5.  Information about other commitments that might affect your ability to work during the GSoC period. (e.g. classes, exams, job, holidays etc.) 

## Guidelines for Contributing

Please visit our [Contributing guide](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)  for more details.